DAGs, with backdoor paths and colliders (#227)
ihmeuw/vivarium_research: docs/source/model_design/general_research.rst

Directed Acyclic Graphs (Causal Diagrams)
------------------------------------------

.. important::

>   The figures represented in this section represent directed acyclic graphs/causal diagrams. These figures are distinct from compartamental model diagrams (such as SIR models). For our purposes we will represent directed acyclic graphs as *circles* connected by arrows and compartamental model diagrams as *squares* connected by arrows.

Reviewer: could you clarify here if 'for our purposes' applies just to this section, or to the full repo?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, this is slightly confusing because there are no compartmental model diagrams in this section.  Perhaps eventually it would be good to switch the entire repo to this convention, but currently all the cause model diagrams are drawn with circles, which is inconsistent with the description here.

Perhaps we could change the wording here to something like: "DAGs for causal diagrams are commonly represented as *circles* connected by arrows, and compartmental model diagrams are commonly represented as *squares* connected by arrows; we will follow this convention here."

  Additionally, for the purposes of directed acyclic graphs, variables will be labeled with capital letters (A, B, C, etc.) and arrows will be labeled with lower case letters (a, b, c, etc.).

Introduction to Directed Acyclic Graphs
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), also termed causal diagrams, are composed of variables that are linked together by directional arrows. Critically, the solid arrows in DAGs represent a causal relationship between an exposure (start of the arrow) and outcome (node of the arrow), representing the *directional* aspect of DAGs. Notably, a directional arrow in a DAG does not offer any information about whether the exposure causes in increased or decreased probability of the outcome, only that there is some causal realtionship bewteen the exposure and outcome. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), also termed causal diagrams, are composed of variables that are linked together by directional arrows. Critically, the solid arrows in DAGs represent a causal relationship between an exposure (start of the arrow) and outcome (node of the arrow), representing the *directional* aspect of DAGs. Notably, a directional arrow in a DAG does not offer any information about whether the exposure causes an increased or decreased probability of the outcome, only that there is some causal realtionship bewteen the exposure and outcome. 
```

Reviewer: When you describe what solid arrows represent, is that universal, or highly common, or just for the DAGs we will be using?

> Directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), also termed causal diagrams, are composed of variables that are linked together by directional arrows. Critically, the solid arrows in DAGs represent a causal relationship between an exposure (start of the arrow) and outcome (node of the arrow), representing the *directional* aspect of DAGs. Notably, a directional arrow in a DAG does not offer any information about whether the exposure causes an increased or decreased probability of the outcome, only that there is some causal realtionship bewteen the exposure and outcome. 

Reviewer 2: I mostly like how this is written, but my one complaint is that DAGs are a general mathematical concept with many different applications, and the causal diagrams described here are a specific application of DAGs.  I can't think of a good way to reword this part right now, but these two Wikipedia pages provide some context, including related models and other applications of DAGs:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Causal_model#Causal_diagram

Reviewer 2: Perhaps something like:

>[Directed acyclic graphs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph) (DAGs) are composed of nodes that are linked together by directional arrows, in such a way that the arrows do not form any [directed cycles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cycle_graph#Directed_cycle_graph). For our purposes here, DAGS will represent [causal diagrams](https://ftp.cs.ucla.edu/pub/stat_ser/r332.pdf). Critically, the solid arrows in DAGs represent a causal relationship between an exposure variable (start of the arrow) and outcome variable (end of the arrow), representing the *directional* aspect of DAGs.

Note: I changed "node of the arrow" to "end of the arrow" - did you mean to write "node" (I'm not familiar with that usage)?

Reviewer 3: A term-of-art for the directional arrows is "arcs", which we could also bring in, e.g. "that are linked together by directional arrows (arcs of the graph)"

Two alternative/additional links https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_graph https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glossary_of_graph_theory_terms

The *acyclic* nature of DAGs is that there cannot be feedback loops between any variables in the graph. In this way, the arrows in DAGs can be interpreted as the passage of time so that the exposure (cause) must always occur temporally *before* the outcome (effect). See the diagram below for an example of an inappropriate and appropriate DAG with regard to temporality.

> .. image:: acyclic_dags.svg

Reviewer: This is really clear, i like this diagram

Reviewer 2: I like it too, though perhaps it's not totally clear from the diagram that you also can't have feedback loops that involve more than two variables. But I think the interpretation in terms of flow of time helps clarify that even if we don't spell it out explicitly.

Applications, Assumptions, and Limitations of Directed Acyclic Graphs
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> DAGs are used in epidemiology to represent a network of relationships between several variables, which in turn helps to guide the selection of variable that will need to be measured or considered in a given study/project. Further, the exact relationship between variables in a DAG will dictate *how* to treat or consider a specific variable in that study/project by helping to indentify potential confounding, intermediate, or mediating variables between a given exposure and outcome of interest (see the `Causal Relationships`_ section for definitions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DAGs are used in epidemiology to represent a network of relationships between several variables, which in turn helps to guide the selection of variables that will need to be measured or considered in a given study/project. Further, the exact relationship between variables in a DAG will dictate *how* to treat or consider a specific variable in that study/project by helping to indentify potential confounding, intermediate, or mediating variables between a given exposure and outcome of interest (see the `Causal Relationships`_ section for definitions).
```

> However, DAGs are limited in that they require *prior causal knowledge* about the variables that may be causally related to a given exposure and outcome of interest. Therefore, there may be uncertain, unmeasured, or unknown variables that cannot be represented in a given DAG. Further, DAGs do not allow for easy representation of direction or magnitude of a causal relationship or for effect modification.

Reviewer 2: Beatrix had indicated that the phrase "direction or magnitude of a causal relationship" could be confusing because "direction" could be interpreted as the direction of the causal arrow, rather than whether the arrow implies an increased or decreased probability of the outcome. I think it helps that you previously mentioned this "increased or decreased probability," but perhaps there's a different way to word this to make that even more clear?

> For the purpose of this section of our documentation, we will assume that each DAG is completely accurate, represents **all** relevant variables in a given causal network and that there are no unrepresented variables.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the purposes of this section of our documentation, we will assume that each DAG is completely accurate, represents **all** relevant variables in a given causal network and that there are no unrepresented variables.
```

Types of Pathways Within Directed Acyclic Graphs
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

A path in a DAG is defined as any route drawn through arrows that link two variables **regardless of the direction of the arrows**.

Directed Paths
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Directed paths are those in which variables are connected through arrows that flow all flow in the same direction. See below for an example of a directed path between variables A and D.

Reviewer 2: I believe the standard definition of directed path requires the arrows all to be oriented in the positive direction relative to the path. On the other hand, I think the current wording implies that there is a directed path from D to A (as well as a directed path from A to D), which (I think) is nonstandard usage. Here's a suggested change to clarify this:

```suggestion
Directed paths are those in which variables are connected through arrows that all flow in the same direction as the path. See below for an example of a directed path from A to D.
```

I think we could also use the phrase "directed path *between* A and D" to mean either a directed path from A to D *or* a directed path from D to A, but I don't know if it's necessary to spell that out.

.. image:: directional_dag.svg

**In the case of a directed path between two variables, those variables will be causally related.**

Undirected Paths
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Undirected paths are those in which variables are connected through arrows that do not all flow from head to tail. The two cases of undirected paths covered here include backdoor paths and colliders.

Reviewer: Maybe, 'do not all flow in the same direction', because each individual arrow flows in it's own defined direction? (that direction being, in my head, is from tail to head; though perhaps that's not a point of contention to anyone else, haha)

Reviewer 2: Agreed, I think 'do not all flow in the same direction' would be better.

**In the case that there is an undirected path (and no directed path) bewteen two variables, those variables will NOT be causally related, although they may be associated in some way.**

Backdoor Paths
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Backdoor paths are those in which two variables are connected via a common cause. In other words, two variables that are linked via a variable that has two arrows flowing *away* from it. See below for an example in which variables Y and Z are connected via a backdoor path through variable X.

.. image:: backdoor_path_dag.svg

> 

Reviewer 2: I like this - I had seen backdoor paths mentioned in papers but didn't know what they were. This made it really clear.

I think to make it even clearer, it would be good to add one more sentence after the image clarifying that a backdoor path can have more than one variable between the endpoints. E.g. if we added some more variables between X and Z, it would still count as a backdoor path between Y and Z.

Reviewer 2: Actually, based on [this reference (pp. 6-7)](https://ftp.cs.ucla.edu/pub/stat_ser/r332.pdf), it seems that the key property of a backdoor path is that it has to start with an arrow pointing into Y. This is not necessarily implied by your definition (e.g. put a collider between X and Y in your diagram), although I think it *is* implied by your definition of *open backdoor path* below - if the path has no colliders *and* has arrows pointing in different directions, then both the initial and final arrows must be pointing "outward" instead of "inward."

Reviewer 2: I think perhaps to resolve both these issues, you could start by saying something like:

> Backdoor paths are those in which two variables are connected via a common cause. The simplest example is when two variables are linked via a third variable that has two arrows flowing *away* from it. See below for an example in which variables Y and Z are connected via a backdoor path through variable X.

Then show the diagram, then afterwards, give a more general definition of backdoor paths.

> **In the case of a backdoor path between two variables (and no directional path), there will be an association (due to a common cause between them), but no causal relationship between the two variables.**

Reviewer 2: We should keep the terminology consistent:

```suggestion
**In the case of a backdoor path between two variables (and no directed path), there will be an association (due to a common cause between them), but no causal relationship between the two variables.**
```

Colliders
^^^^^^^^^

Colliders are variables that have more than one cause; in other words, where pathways collide and a variable has two arrows flowing *toward* it. See below for an example in which variable Z is a collider on the path between X and Y.

.. image:: collider_dag.svg

> **In the case that two variables are linked through a pathway with a collider (and there is no directional or backdoor pathway between them), there will be no association or causal realtionship between the two variables.** This is also referred to as a **"closed path."**

Reviewer 2: Again, consistency, and clarify what "this" refers to (please correct my interpretation if I got it wrong):

```suggestion
**In the case that two variables are linked through a pathway with a collider (and there is no directed or backdoor path between them), there will be no association or causal realtionship between the two variables.** A path with a collider is also referred to as a **"closed path."**
```

Reviewer 2: Also, I think it would be good to mention that conditioning on a collider introduces dependence between its parents. See e.g.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collider_(statistics)
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berkson%27s_paradox

This topic is probably out of scope for this PR, and perhaps should go in a separate section, but maybe add a Todo.

Reviewer 2: Also it might be good to clarify that when we say that "a path has a collider" and hence is closed, we mean that the path contains the collider *and* its parents (i.e. we are abusing terminology by using the word "collider" to refer either to the single vertex Z or to the 3-vertex structure X -> Z <- Y, depending on context)...

For example, a path could still be open if it contains Z but does not contain X and Y.

Reviewer 2: In fact, I think it might be a good idea to create a new subsection called "Open and Closed Paths" between thee "Colliders" section and the "Summary." You could move that final sentence defining open and closed paths to the new section, and clarify exactly what we mean when we say that a collider is or is not on a path.

Summary
~~~~~~~

.. list-table:: DAG Pathways
   :widths: 5 5 5 5 5
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Path Name/Term
     - Description
     - Direction
     - Open or closed
     - Association

>    * - Direct path

Reviewer: Is this a 'direct' or a 'directed' path, or are both terms used? if it's one or the other, i think it would be helpful to make this chart align with the section from line 711-714!

Reviewer 2: This should be "Directed path".

     - Path with arrows flowing in same direction
     - Directed
     - Open
     - Causal relationship
   * - Open backdoor path
     - Path with arrows flowing in different directions without a collider
     - Undirected
     - Open
     - Non-causal association
   * - Closed path

>      - Path with arrows flowing in different directions with a collider

Reviewer 2: I think saying "with arrows flowing in different directions" is redundant - how about just saying "Path with a collider"?

     - Undirected
     - Closed
     - No association

Identifying Confounding Using Directed Acyclic Graphs
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> 

Reviewer 2: I like the colors for the graphs in this section!

As discussed previously in this documentation, confounding arises when a given exposure and outcome share a common cause (Confounding_). This section will help to identify potential confounding variables in a given causal network that may be less explicit than the example(s) presented in the Confounding_ section.

For the remainder of this section, we will focus on the relationship between a particular exposure (E), shown in blue, and a particular outcome (O), shown in purple.

In the context of DAGs, confounding may occur when there is an *open* backdoor pathway (*unblocked* backdoor pathway with no colliders) between an exposure and outcome of interest. Therefore, any variable that can be used to block an open backdoor path between a given exposure and outcome is a *confounder* with regard to the relationship between that exposure and outcome. 

> "Blocking" an open backdoor path can be done via randomization of that variable between exposure groups in the context of an randomized controlled trial or via conditioning (adjustment via stratification or other methods) in the context of an observational study  on that variable. In the following diagrams, variables that are blocked in this way will be represented as squares rather than circles; when this is the case, assume that a pathway with a square variable is a *closed* pathway. Notably, it is not necessary to condition on all variables on a backdoor path; the path can be closed by conditioning on a minimal set of variables and there may be more than one possible minimal set of variables. See below for possible options for closing backdoor paths by conditioning a *minimal set* of variables (in this case a single variable).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Blocking" an open backdoor path can be done via randomization of that variable between exposure groups in the context of a randomized controlled trial or via conditioning (adjustment via stratification or other methods) in the context of an observational study  on that variable. In the following diagrams, variables that are blocked in this way will be represented as squares rather than circles; when this is the case, assume that a pathway with a square variable is a *closed* pathway. Notably, it is not necessary to condition on all variables on a backdoor path; the path can be closed by conditioning on a minimal set of variables and there may be more than one possible minimal set of variables. See below for possible options for closing backdoor paths by conditioning a *minimal set* of variables (in this case a single variable).
```

So far in this section, we have only made use of solid arrows to represent explicit causal relationships. However, situations may arise in which there is an observed association between two variables for which the driving force behind that association may be unknown, although it is not believed to be (or there is insufficient evidence to conclude) a direct *causal* relationship between the two variables.

In this case, it may still be useful to represent this association in a DAG without drawing a direct causal relationship between these two variables. There are two potential ways to do so.

The first approach is to introduce an additional variable into the dag, termed "U", or "Unknown" that is causally related to the two associated variables, as shown below. Here, it can be seen that because variables A and B share a common cause (U), they will be associated, although they are not causally related. This approach allows us to use the DAG to identify confounding in the relationship between the exposure and outcome in the way described in this section above (identifying any open backdoor paths, which may flow through the variable U).

.. image:: unknown_var_association.svg

> The second approach is to represent the association between the two variables with a *dashed* line. For our purposes, dashed lines in DAGs will represent a non-causal association between two variables as shown in the figure below. While this format does not allow us to easily identify open backdoor paths in the way described in this section, it still allows us to identify confounding using the definition provided in the Confounding_ section. Additionally, this method allows us to represent non-casual associations that we may want to model explicitly, such as a correlation coefficient between two variables.

Reviewer: I think, again, it would be helpful to specify if this schematic representation decision (dashed arrow = association) will be global to our repo (which seems like a good idea, and which i think we had decided on!) or specific to this section
